[[Satellite Data Analysis]]
15/10/2025
****

We call a **sensor** a device that can record incoming radiance. This radiance is an amount of energy emitted by the surface, or energy reflected by another source — such as another sensor. 

A sensor can be **active** or **passive** :
- **Passive:** Collecting incoming Electromagnetic radiations (information that is not generated by itself)
	*Small energy consumption, and has a behaviour that relies heavily on the source*
- **Active:** Sensor that generates Electromagnetic waves in order to trigger a reaction it will collect.
	*Requires more power than a passive sensor, but work 24/7 in general*

Active sensor is overall less dependant on the data source, which guarantees more consistent results through time.


****
## Passive Sensors

When analysing, we use one (or several) pass-band filter that focuses on a **central wavelength** (a single specific value in the spectrum), but this filter also captures an entire finite wavelength range (the values around this specific wavelength) that surrounds this central wavelength.
	*This is used in order to capture a useful set of EM that are nearby the target value. Capturing a single wavelength is, most of the time, not providing enough data.*


An imaging spectrometer is generating a footprint (an image) from a multispectral sensor. Those satellites, in general, do not accumulate data continuously, but only captures zones of interest. 


Thermal sensors are measuring the thermal wavelength. 
This wavelength is large as the earth does not emits a lot of heat. We need to enlarge the wavelength to make sure we do capture everything, especially because noise tends to easily obfuscate this kind of data.


****
## Active Sensors

LIDAR is a laser that is put on a platform (an airplane in general). It is a **point-wise measurement** that focuses on one point of the surface of the earth, then another, etc.
This allows to detect, but also to range entities compared to the laser's position via **pulses**.

Unlike a laser pointer we can buy, this laser does not work on the VIS wavelength (as it would be dangerous) but in the infrared one.

Airborne LIDAR is used to obtain a **Point Cloud** of an area (3D-Shaped fuzzy render of points in different positions). When this render is coloured, blue represents the lower parts (grass for instance), and red are the tall ones (skyscrapers for instance). 

From that point cloud, we can build the **Digital Surface Model (DSM)**, which is a grid that indicates the 3D-position of an object in space. This model is coupled with the **Digital Terrain Model (DTM)** which represents the dimensions of the terrain (the ground, what's under vegetation etc). This allows the DSM to be more accurate.
	*A pulse will receive an answer. The first return is from the matter in most direct contact with the LIDAR pulse (leaves of a tree, for instance), this is filling the **DSM**. But most of the time, the infrared EM keeps going through matter and gives a second return (the EM goes through the tree's leaves, and reaches the ground), this is filling the **DTM** as this second return is, in general, the terrain.*

The accuracy of a point is based on a radius. In general, this radius is of 0,5 meters when we want a detailed Point cloud. 
	*If the pulse reaches a tree, we don't obtain the height of the one specific leave it felt on, but the average height of all the leaves in this 0,5m radius.


Altimeters are mostly used for Ocean surface measurements (height of water).
If the analysed zone has a water level that is not too deep (like a lake), the altimeter sensor can also retrieve the depths.



