[[Web And Multimedia Technologies]]
26/11/2024
****
**Table of Contents**
```table-of-contents
```

****
## Web 2.0 ?

Web 2.0 does not really define a new set of technology, but rather **a new way of conceiving the web**.

Users aren't passive surfers anymore, they actively interact with the websites.
	*Forums, Social Networks, Video-sharing, Blogs, Wikis... arrived at that time.*


****
## Interaction

HTML alone is insufficient to introduce interaction between the user and the website. Interaction can be handled in two ways:
	**Client-side interaction**: Code is executed on the user's machine 
		*JavaScript, ActiveX controls (for Internet Explorer), Adobe Flash, Java Applets... Most of them are now obsolete, leaving JS as the only decent solution*
	**Server-side interaction**! The behaviour of the page is defined by code executed on the server, generating content or handling logic before sending it to the user.


****
## Dynamic

A website is considered **dynamic** if its content is generated in real time, often tailored to the user's request or actions.
	*A newspaper querying the article from a database, website with login/registration feature...*

The legacy approach was to use Common Gateway Interface (CGI) scripts, which were an early way to introduce **server-side** dynamic content, often used to process form data. 
These scripts could be written in any programming language, such as Python:
```python
#!/usr/bin/python
import cgi

form = cgi.FieldStorage()
n = form.getvalue('n')
s = form.getvalue('s')

print("Content-type:text/html\r\n\r\n")
print(f"""
<html>
    <head>
        <title>Test: CGI in Python</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1>Ciao {n} {s}!</h1>
    </body>
</html>
""")
```
> [!caution] This way of doing things is completely deprecated

Today, application servers (e.g., Node.js, Django, Flask, Express...) are used to interpret and execute server-side code efficiently. These servers handle dynamic content generation, replacing the need for CGI scripts.

A third option is to use Servlets (as they allow multithreading and end up being very performant).

