[[Web And Multimedia Technologies]]
***
**Table of Contents**
```table-of-contents
```

****
## Why?

The problem with JavaScript is that we don't really know the shape of what we manipulate (does the object exist, does the method we call on it exist, is the object of the correct type, blabla), which often end up in an unpredictable `ReferenceError` or `TypeError` thrown by the browser at runtime. 
Furthermore, as it is impossible to know the type of a variable, your favourite IDE is not able to provide intellisense on it.
	*When IDEs can, it's because they run your Js code into the typescript compiler under the hood.*

This is why vanilla Js does not appear as a good option for large projects, as the code will get less and less maintainable as the code grows.


***
## Fundamentals

TypeScript is a statically typed, compiled language that acts as a superset of JavaScript (Js, but it supports types).
The philosophy is to be more helpful to the programmer than restrictive, which is why all of TypeScript features are optional, and a `.ts` file can, in fact, contain pure vanilla JavaScript code without anything added.
	*We consider than the programmer knows better than TypeScript what he is doing. Ts doesn't get in your way by default, even though you can—and should—use strict policies later on*

A `.ts` file will be, upon compilation using the `tsc` command, transpiled to native JavaScript code: 
```ts
// TypeScript code
let user: string = "sir";
console.log(`Hello, ${user}!`);
```
```js
// JavaScript-transpiled code
var user = "sir";
console.log("Hello, " + user + "!");
```
> [!important] 
> TypeScript acts as a **compile-time type checker**, meaning the type annotations are removed during the transpilation process, and only pure JavaScript is returned to be executed by the browser or server. 
> Ts Is mostly here to help and allow the developer to deliver a more decent code.

It is worth mentioning that your Ts code can be transpiled to any version of ECMAScript (ES5 by default, for compatibility with old ass browsers), including old ones; this is what we call **downleveling**.

> [!example]- Simple downleveling example 
> 
> ```ts
> const greet = (name: string): string => {
>     return `Hello, ${name}! Welcome to TypeScript.`;
> };
> 
> console.log(greet("John"));
> ```
> 
> If compiled for ES6 (`--target ES2015`):
> ```js
> const greet = (name) => {
>     return `Hello, ${name}! Welcome to TypeScript.`;
> };
> console.log(greet("John"));
> ```
> 
> But for the default behaviour (or if compiled with flag `--target ES5`):
> ```js
> var greet = function (name) {
>     return "Hello, " + name + "! Welcome to TypeScript.";
> };
> console.log(greet("John"));
> ```

The behaviour and policies of our Ts project can be managed via a `tsconfig.json` file placed at the root of the project. More on that later in the lecture.

TypeScript can replace vanilla JavaScript with most web frameworks (React, Vue, Angular...).


### Types
#### Common types

As we mentioned above, the primary goal of Ts is to provide static typing:
```ts
let firstName: string;       // Explicit type
firstName = 23;              // Error

let lastName = "Petit";      // Implicit type (inference) 

let whatever: any = "Hello"; // Loosely type (opt out), this variable can contain anything
whatever = 10;               // Works, no error
```

We find the basic primitives from Js (number, string and boolean), along with the new `any` type we saw above.
If no type is specified, and Ts can’t infer it from context, the compiler will typically default to `any`. This kinds of defeat the entire point of Ts, it's like using `Object` in Java.
	*You can use the `noImplicitAny` flag to consider any implicit `any` as an error*

Beyond primitives are "object" types, which refer to any value with properties.
We can use `?` to indicate that a property is optional. The value will default to `undefined`, so you have to ensure it's not before using it.
```ts
function printCoord(pt: { x: number; y: number }) {
  console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
  console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
}
printCoord({ x: 3, y: 7 });

function printName(obj: { first: string; last?: string }) {
	if (obj.last !== undefined) {
	    // Now, we can use "last" as a string
	    console.log(obj.last.toUpperCase());
	}
	// ...
}

// Both works
printName({ first: "Bob" });
printName({ first: "Alice", last: "Alisson" });
```
> [!info]
> Here, we describe our object directly in type annotations. A better way of doing so is to use an [[13.2 - TypeScript#Type Aliases & Interfaces|alias]].

Typing is also here for functions (parameters and return type):
```ts
function greet(name: string): number {
  console.log("Hello, " + name.toUpperCase() + "!!");
  return 0;
}

// Functions returning a promise now has a dedicated new type
async function getFavoriteNumber(): Promise<number> {
  return 26;
}
```

#### Union types & Narrowing
*Now this appears to be an important Ts feature but I find it pretty messy, ultimately permitting bad code design.*

An union type is formed from two or more other types, representing values that may be *any one* of those types:
```ts
function printId(id: number | string) {
  console.log("Your ID is: " + id);
}

printId(101);             // Works, can be a string
printId("202");           // Works, can be a number
printId({ myID: 22342 }); // Error
```
> [!caution] Problem with this
> As the value can be of several types, we have to check every scenario. This forces the developer to **narrow** the union with code (isolate each behaviour depending on what type you got), which ends up with ugly code.
> Ts also being an object-oriented language, classic patterns of the later paradigm are here to avoid using this kind of feature. I'd advise to stick to it.

#### Type Aliases & Interfaces

A first way of defining an object blueprint is via type aliases:
```ts
type Point = {
  x: number;
  y: number;
};
 
function printCoord(pt: Point) {
  console.log("x value is " + pt.x);
  console.log("y value is " + pt.y);
}

printCoord({ x: 100, y: 100 });
```

Another way of doing it is by using an **interface declaration**:
```ts
interface Point {
  x: number;
  y: number;
}
 
function printCoord(pt: Point) {
  console.log("x value is " + pt.x);
  console.log("y value is " + pt.y);
}
 
printCoord({ x: 100, y: 100 });
```

> [!important]
> TypeScript is a **structurally typed** type system.
> It can consider two different types equal, as long as **they share the same structure (properties)**.
> This is all that matters to TypeScript: if two distinct types shares the same characteristics, they are interchangeable.


